.\" Man pages for boot-notify

.TH man 1 "2015-12-13" "0.93" "boot-notify man pages"

.SH NAME
.B "boot-notify"

The "boot-notify" package holds a systemd boot-notify.service and bn-sendopen.sh and bn-sendclose.sh scripts. The service triggers the scripts to send e-mail messages informing that the host has been switched on or off. Both the scripts may be run manually.

.SH SYNOPSIS
When invoked by boot-notify.service:
.br
.RS
.B /usr/bin/sudo -u <USER> /usr/bin/bn-sendopen.sh
.br
.B /usr/bin/sudo -u <USER> /usr/bin/bn-sendclose.sh
.RE
Where <USER> is the user whose e-mail settings will be used to send the notification. See the 'CONFIGURATION' section below.
.br
.PP
When run manually by a user:
.br
.RS
.B bn-sendopen.sh
[\fB\-s\fR\fI SUBJECT\fR] [\fBrecipient\fR]
.br
.B bn-sendclose.sh
[\fB\-s\fR\fI SUBJECT\fR] [\fBrecipient\fR]
.RE
.br
where the recipient should be a proper e-mail address.

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
If enabled, the boot-notify.service sends a boot-time notification e-mail message as soon as the network.target has been reached. Using this message a remote recipient is able to ssh into the host that has sent the message. The service sends a similar notice when the host is shutting down.
.br

For safety reasons, the e-mail messages contain information only about the host's current IP. No other information needed to ssh-log into the host is sent.


.SH OPTIONS AND PARAMETERS
.TP
.B -s SUBJECT
.br
The subject of the message to be e-mailed. If not specified, as when used by the boot-notify.service, the SUBJECT defaults to "\fBBoot notification from $HOSTNAME\fR" or "\fBShutdown notification from $HOSTNAME\fR" when used by bn-sendopen.sh and bn-sendclose.sh respectively.
.PP
.RS
When the scripts are run manually, the SUBJECT may have any value, but the default values are the same as with the boot-notify.service.
.RE
.TP
.B recipient
.br
The recipient should be a proper (domain) e-mail address. Any host system $USER may also be used providing the \fI/etc/aliases\fR file holds the \fIproper address(es)\fR for the $USER. If not specified, the \fI$recipient\fR defaults to the $USER that invokes the sending script.
.PP


.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
Formal dependencies:
- bind-tools (command: dig)
.br
- gawk (comman: awk)
.br
- iproute2 (command: ip)
.br
- s-nail (command: mail)
.br
- msmtp
.PP
It is possible to modify the scripts and configurations in such a way that s-nail may be dropped, but the autor prefers using s-nail for many reasons, including an option to send e-mail messages with attachments from cron/systemd-timers.
.PP


.SH INSTALLATION
Make sure that all dependencies have been installed, and install 'boot-notify' manually by copying the \fIbn-sendopen.sh\fR and \fIbn-sendclose.sh\fR scripts to the \fB/usr/bin\fR directory and by copying the \fIboot-notify.service\fR to the \fB/etc/systemd/system\fR directory.
.PP
Or use a package build. The is an Arch Linux PKGBUILD file available at \fIhttp://github/wiemag/PKGBUILDs\fR.
.PP
There must be a program providing the "\fBmail\fR" command line installed and configured on the host, e.g. \fIs-nail\fR, \fIheirloom-mailx\fR, or \fIsendmail\fR. There also must be an smtp client installed and configured, e.g. \fImsmtp\fR. In other words, there must be a command line system delivering e-mail installed and configured on the host.

.SH CONFIGURATION AND USAGE OF THE SERVICE
It is assumed here that a command line system delivering e-mail has been installed and configured on the host. It is recommended that this system should use gpg (gnu pg) to encrypt and conceal e-mail passwords. This recommendation extends to the "\fBssh-email-connector\fR" package. See the 'SEE ALSO' section below.
.PP
Please note that the e-mail system needs to be configured separately for each \fI$USER\fR that intends to use it.
.br
Note also that the \fIroot\fR user needs to have such an e-mail system configured for him. If not, root has to use a system configured for a regular user.
.br
Finally, note that the \fBSYNOPSIS\fR section, above, shows how \fIroot\fR uses other user's e-mail configuration.
.PP
The \fBconfiguration of boot-notify.service\fR boils down to replacing the "\fI<USER>\fR" with the actual user name to be used, or to removing the whole "sudo" section from the command lines invoking bn-sendopen.sh and bn-sendclose.sh.
.PP
The configuration or rather the set-up is completed by enabling the boot-notify.service:
.RS
sudo systemctl enable boot-notify.service
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
.B ssh-email-connector
An ssh command  wrapper to connect to remote hosts, using the information e-mailed by boot-notify.service.
.TP
.B /etc/aliases
Read about the sendmail's aliases file (/etc/aliases). For instance here:
.RS
.I 	http://www.gsp.com/cgi-bin/man.cgi?topic=aliases
.br
However, note that in this case \fI/etc/aliases\fR must contain domain type e-mail address(es).
.RE

.SH BUGS
Please contact the author if you find any.

.SH AUTHOR
.AU
Wiesław Magusiak <w.magusiak at gmail . com>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Do what you like with the boot-notify, but do not blame the author. No warranty is given, and no responsible is taken for the use.
